## Page 1

Government
Functional Standard
GovS 013: Counter Fraud
Management of counter fraud, bribery and 
corruption activity
Version: 2.0
Date issued: August 2021
Approved


## Page 2

This functional standard is part of a suite of management standards that promotes consistent 
and coherent ways of working across government, and provides a stable basis for assurance, 
risk management and capability improvement.
The suite of standards, and associated guidance, can be found at GOV.UK government 
functional standards.
Functional standards cross-refer to each other where needed, so can be confidently 
used together.
They contain both mandatory and advisory elements, described in consistent language 
(see the table below).
Term
Intention
shall
denotes a requirement: a mandatory element.
should
denotes a recommendation: an advisory element.
may
denotes approval.
might
denotes a possibility.
can
denotes both capability and possibility.
is/are
denotes a description.
The meaning of words is as defined in the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, except where 
defined in the Glossary in Annex B.
It is assumed that legal and regulatory requirements are always met.
GovS 013, Counter Fraud: Version 2 of GovS 013 replaces version 1.1 and has the same 
purpose, scope and intent. The main changes relate to general enhancements derived from 
feedback, use and changes to other standards.
© Crown copyright 2021
Produced by Counter Fraud Centre of Expertise, part of the Government Counter Fraud 
Function within the Cabinet Office.
You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or medium, 
under the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, 
visit http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/ or 
email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk
Where we have identified any third party copyright material you will need to obtain permission 
from the copyright holders concerned.
﻿Government Functional Standard
ii


## Page 3

Contents
1.	
About this government functional standard
2
1.1	
Purpose of this standard
2
1.2	
Scope of this standard
2
1.3	
Government standards references
2
2.	
Principles
3
3.	
Context
4
4.	
Governance
4
4.1	
Governance and management frameworks
4
4.2	
Strategy
5
4.3	
Organisational action plans and metrics
6
4.4	
Organisational policy and response plans
6
4.5	
Assurance
7
4.6	
Decision making
8
4.7	
Roles and accountabilities
8
5.	
Counter fraud, bribery and corruption practices
11
5.1	
Risk assessments
11
5.2	
Reporting routes
11
5.3	
Record keeping
11
5.4	
Loss reporting
11
5.5	
Access to trained investigators
12
5.6	
Proactive detection activity
12
5.7	
Awareness training
12
5.8	
Policies and registers for gifts, hospitality and conflicts of interest
12
A.	
References
13
B.	
Glossary
14
C.	
Counter fraud organisational basics checklist
16
iii
Version 2.0 – August 2021
GovS 013: Counter Fraud


## Page 4

1
2
3
4
5
Context
Governance
Principles
About this government 
functional standard
Strategy
Action Plans 
and Metrics
Policy and 
Response Plans
Risk 
Assessments
Reporting 
Routes
Access to 
Trained 
Investigators
Loss Reporting
Counter fraud, bribery and corruption practices
Annexes
A: References
B: Glossary
C: Counter Fraud Organisational Basics Checklist
Governance and 
management 
framework
Assurance
Decision making
Roles and 
Responsibilities
Proactive 
Detection Activity
Awareness
Training
Policies and 
Registers for 
Gifts and 
Hospitality
Figure 1 Structure and scope of this functional standard
1
Version 2.0 – August 2021
GovS 013: Counter Fraud


## Page 5

1.	 About this 
government 
functional standard
1.1	 Purpose of this standard
The purpose of this government functional 
standard is to set the expectations for the 
management of counter fraud, bribery 
and corruption activity in government 
organisations.
This standard provides direction and 
guidance for:
•	
permanent secretaries, directors 
general, chief executive officers and 
chief financial officers of government 
departments and arm’s-length bodies
•	
counter fraud leads within organisations 
who manage fraud, bribery and 
corruption risk
•	
members of audit and risk committees
•	
audit and assurance bodies
•	
employees and third party suppliers
1.2	 Scope of this standard
This standard applies to the planning, 
delivery and management of the measures 
needed to counter fraud, bribery and 
corruption in government departments and 
their arm’s-length bodies. Other public 
sector organisations, devolved or local, 
might find this standard useful.
The structure of the standard is shown 
in Figure 1.
1.3	 Government standards 
references
The following standards are directly 
necessary for the use of this standard:
•	
GovS 006, Finance
•	
GovS 007, Security
•	
GovS 009, Internal Audit
A functional standard supports achievement 
of the outcomes sought by an organisation. 
It sets expectations for what needs to be 
done and why relating to the functional work 
within its scope, in order to achieve those 
organisational outcomes.
Note: For expectations relating to management 
of a function across government, and 
management of functional standards, please 
see GovS 001, government functions.
﻿Government Functional Standard
2


## Page 6

2.	 Principles
Those engaged in counter fraud, bribery 
and corruption work shall ensure:
1.	 objectives are aligned to government 
policy and organisational objectives
2.	 accountabilities and responsibilities for 
managing fraud, bribery and corruption 
risk are defined, mutually consistent, 
and traceable across all levels 
of management
3.	 staff have the skills, awareness and 
capability to protect the organisation 
against fraud, bribery and corruption
4.	 controls are in place to mitigate 
fraud, bribery and corruption risks 
and are regularly reviewed to meet 
evolving threats
5.	 fraud, bribery and corruption risk 
management practices, tools and 
methods continue to evolve in line 
with industry trends, threats and 
best practice
6.	 the standard is applied in accordance 
with the professional standards and 
guidance for counter fraud, bribery 
and corruption [1]
7.	 public service codes of conduct 
and ethics, and those of associated 
professions are upheld
3
Version 2.0 – August 2021
GovS 013: Counter Fraud


## Page 7

3.	 Context
This section provides essential 
background information for the use 
of this functional standard.
Fraud is a significant risk to the UK 
public sector and has far-reaching financial 
and reputational consequences. The 
government estimates that fraud costs 
the public sector between £31 billion 
and £53 billion per year and much of 
this goes undetected.
Other threats to the public sector include 
bribery and corruption, as well as wider 
economic crime, which is also a core focus 
of our fight to reduce loss to the public 
sector as a whole.
Due to the nature of fraud, bribery and 
corruption being hidden crimes, the 
National Audit Office has challenged the 
government to do more in this space.
The Counter Fraud Function is one of 
government’s fourteen functions, bringing 
together 16,000 public servants who 
work to find and tackle fraud, bribery 
and corruption, and wider economic 
crime across central government.
4.	 Governance
4.1	 Governance and 
management frameworks
4.1.1	 Overview
Governance comprises prioritising, 
authorising, directing, empowering and 
overseeing management, while assuring 
and reviewing
performance. A governance and 
management framework for counter fraud, 
bribery and corruption shall be defined 
and established at government and 
organisational levels, which comply with 
government and departmental policies 
and directives, and with this standard
4.1.2	 Governance and management 
framework across government
The governance and management 
framework across government should 
include:
•	
mandatory policies, processes, data 
and other requirements, together with 
associated guidance
•	
requirements for tracking and reporting 
performance in organisations
•	
guidance and provision of expert 
support, training and assurance
4.1.3	 Governance and management 
framework in an organisation
A governance and management framework 
should detail the organisation’s policy and 
arrangements for managing fraud, bribery 
and corruption risk in the organisation 
(see 4.4). 
The policy should set out:
•	
the standards of expected behaviour, 
including how they align to the Civil 
Service Code [7]
﻿Government Functional Standard
4


## Page 8

•	
how fraud, bribery and corruption 
is defined in the organisation with 
reference to current legislation and 
government definitions
•	
how the organisation deals with fraud, 
bribery and corruption, including activity 
to find fraud, bribery and corruption
•	
the organisation’s approach to fraud, 
bribery and corruption risk assessment
•	
staff and management responsibilities 
within the organisation for countering 
fraud, bribery and corruption
•	
how the organisation intends to improve 
based upon lessons learnt
The governance and management 
framework in an organisation should 
include, but not be limited to:
•	
the role and responsibilities of the 
board and audit committee in respect 
of counter fraud, bribery and corruption
•	
procedures and processes for taking 
decisions, and the degree of autonomy
•	
requirements for fraud, bribery and 
corruption risk reporting, and incident 
management
•	
the arrangements for obtaining 
organisational assurance (see 4.5)
The governance of counter fraud, bribery 
and corruption risk within an organisation 
should be an integrated part of that 
organisation’s overall governance.
4.2	 Strategy
4.2.1	 Cross-government counter fraud 
strategy
The senior officer accountable for counter 
fraud across government (see 4.7.2) should 
develop and maintain a cross-government 
counter fraud strategy.
The strategy should:
•	
be developed in collaboration with the 
organisational senior officer accountable 
for counter fraud (see 4.7.6) taking into 
account the needs, objectives and 
priorities of their organisation
•	
consider external best practice, as well 
as previous learning from within the 
Civil Service
•	
be agreed by a board comprised of the 
organisational senior officer accountable 
for counter fraud (see 4.7.6)
•	
be communicated to organisations 
in order that it can be successfully 
implemented
•	
be maintained for relevance and 
its implementation monitored 
and measured
4.2.2	 Organisational counter fraud 
strategy
Organisations should have a counter fraud, 
bribery and corruption strategy, which 
should be approved by the organisation’s 
board or executive risk committee. The 
strategy may consist of a single overarching 
strategy or separate strategies (counter 
fraud as one, bribery and corruption as the 
other) depending on how the organisation 
is structured.
The strategy should set the direction and 
desired outcomes relating to counter fraud, 
bribery and corruption over the next 2 to 5 
years, including:
•	
an assessment of the main risks and 
challenges facing the organisation
•	
an assessment of how the fraud, bribery 
and corruption landscape may change
•	
where the organisation wants to be in 
the next two to five years
•	
how it intends to actively counter fraud, 
bribery and corruption and develop 
its response
•	
objectives for the period of the strategy
5
Version 2.0 – August 2021
GovS 013: Counter Fraud


## Page 9

The strategy should be informed by a fraud, 
bribery and corruption risk assessment and 
be updated to take account of changes in 
the internal and external environment.
4.3	 Organisational action plans 
and metrics
4.3.1	 Annual action plan
Each organisation should develop and 
maintain an annual action plan to show how 
the organisation’s counter fraud, bribery and 
corruption strategy is to be implemented. 
The plan should include actions to improve 
capability and resilience, and should target 
areas of improvement.
The annual action plan should:
•	
state the objectives and outcomes 
being targeted
•	
describe prioritised improvement 
activities, with milestones for delivery
•	
set accountability for the delivery of 
each activity
•	
be tracked and maintained so that 
progress against the plan can be 
monitored and reviewed
•	
be reviewed and updated to reflect 
changes in strategy and the internal 
and external environment
Organisations should submit their annual 
action plan to the Counter Fraud Centre of 
Expertise prior to the start of the financial 
year and supply progress updates quarterly, 
or as required.
4.3.2	 Outcome based metrics
Organisations should define the outcomes 
they are seeking to achieve that year, and 
should have metrics to measure whether 
the targeted outcome has been achieved. 
For organisations with a significant 
investment in counter fraud, bribery and 
corruption or a significant estimated fraud 
loss, these should include metrics with a 
financial impact.
Metrics with a financial impact should be 
based on a targeted value of prevented 
and/or detected fraud against a baseline 
to measure improvement over time.
Organisations should target an increase 
in the total amount of detected fraud and/
or loss prevented from their counter fraud 
strategy (see 4.2.2).
Whether an organisation has a significant
investment in counter fraud, bribery and 
corruption should be agreed between the 
organisation and the Counter Fraud
Centre of Expertise.
Note: Significant investment is the level 
of expenditure allocated to counter fraud, 
bribery and corruption as a proportion of 
the gross expenditure limit or level of fraud 
loss incurred.
4.4	 Organisational policy 
and response plans
Organisations should have a counter 
fraud, bribery and corruption policy, and 
a response plan for dealing with potential 
instances of fraud, bribery and corruption.
The policy should set out:
•	
the standards of expected behaviour, 
including how they align to the Civil 
Service Code [7]
•	
how fraud, bribery and corruption 
is defined in the organisation with 
reference to current legislation and 
government definitions
﻿Government Functional Standard
6


## Page 10

•	
how the organisation deals with fraud, 
bribery and corruption, including activity 
to find fraud
•	
the organisation’s approach to fraud, 
bribery and corruption risk assessment
•	
staff and management responsibilities 
within the organisation for countering 
fraud, bribery and corruption
•	
how the organisation intends to improve 
based upon lessons learnt
The response plan should include:
•	
where individuals can report potential 
instances of fraud, bribery and 
corruption
•	
how the organisation deals with 
individual items of intelligence from 
reporting routes and other sources
•	
how the organisation responds 
to instances of fraud, bribery and 
corruption
•	
how the organisation monitors the 
progress of investigations, and takes 
decisions on them
•	
the roles and responsibilities of staff, 
teams and individual functions in 
responding to instances of fraud, bribery 
and corruption
•	
how this information should be reported 
both within the organisation, and to 
other relevant organisations (including 
law enforcement agencies)
The policy and response plan might 
contain sensitive information and should 
be communicated in accordance with the 
government security classification (see 
GovS 007, Security).
4.5	 Assurance
The purpose of assurance is to provide, 
through a systematic set of actions, 
confidence to senior leaders and 
stakeholders that work is controlled and 
supports safe and successful delivery of 
policy, strategy and objectives.
Organisations should have a defined 
and established approach to assurance, 
which should be applied proportionately 
to the risk and value of the activity, and 
integrated with the organisation’s overall 
assurance framework.
Typically, assurance should be on at least 
three separate and defined levels including:
•	
by, or on behalf of operational 
management that own and manage 
fraud, bribery and corruption risk, to 
ensure this standard is being used
•	
by, or on behalf of senior management, 
independent of operational 
management, to ensure the first line of 
defence is properly designed, in place, 
and operating in line with this standard
•	
by independent bodies to provide 
senior management with an objective 
opinion on the effectiveness of the 
organisation’s overall counter fraud 
response and compliance with this 
functional standard
The work of internal and external 
assurance providers should be planned 
to minimise disruption to other work, 
avoiding overlaps with other assurance 
activities and duplication of effort, whilst 
remaining rigorous and meeting the needs 
of stakeholders. Where assurance includes 
formal review activity, the customer for the 
review should be clearly identified.
GovS 009, Internal Audit shall be followed.
The requirements of the Orange Book: 
management of risk- principles and 
concepts [8], shall be met.
7
Version 2.0 – August 2021
GovS 013: Counter Fraud


## Page 11

4.6	 Decision making
Decisions relating to counter fraud, 
bribery and corruption management 
should be made and approvals given 
in a timely manner, in accordance 
with the organisation’s counter fraud 
bribery and corruption governance 
and management framework.
Government policy shall be complied with. 
Decisions should be made by assessing 
options against defined criteria and 
in consultation with stakeholders and 
subject matter experts. 
4.7	 Roles and accountabilities
4.7.1	 Introduction
Roles and accountabilities shall be 
defined in the relevant governance and 
management framework and assigned 
to people with appropriate seniority, skills 
and experience.
This should include, but is not limited to, 
the activities, outputs or outcomes they 
are responsible for, and the person they 
are accountable to.
Roles may be allocated to more than one 
individual and be supported by a team of 
specialists as appropriate, so long as the 
accountability is clear.
4.7.2	 Senior officer accountable for 
counter fraud across government
The senior officer accountable for counter 
fraud, bribery and corruption across 
government is accountable to the chief 
operating officer of the Civil Service for 
the implementation of cross-government 
counter fraud policy. In discharging this 
role, they should:
•	
develop and maintain the 
cross‑government counter fraud 
strategy (see 4.2.1)
•	
set the governance and management 
framework for the delivery of cross 
government counter fraud, bribery 
and corruption priorities (see 4.1.2)
•	
advise ministers and senior officials on 
the government’s counter fraud, bribery 
and corruption response
•	
oversee the standards of professionalism 
for counter fraud, bribery and corruption 
across government
Note. The current job title associated with this 
role is the Director of Fraud, Debt and Grants 
Management Functions, and Director of the 
Counter Fraud Function.
4.7.3	 Counter fraud Centre of Expertise
The counter fraud Centre of Expertise is 
the corporate centre of the government’s 
Counter Fraud Function.
The centre, based in the Cabinet Office, 
leads the government’s Counter Fraud 
Function and accountable to the senior 
officer accountable for counter fraud, 
bribery and corruption across government 
(see 4.7.2) for supporting organisations 
to develop their counter fraud capability, 
through the provision of standards, expert 
advice and counter fraud services.
The counter fraud Centre of Expertise shall:
•	
put in place the structures to 
develop counter fraud capability 
across government
•	
maintain the UK’s evidence-base 
on public sector fraud, bribery 
and corruption
•	
advise ministers and senior officials on 
the government’s counter fraud, bribery 
and corruption response
•	
deliver services which organisations 
can use to strengthen their counter 
fraud, bribery and corruption response
•	
promote leading practice on counter 
fraud as the UK’s centre of expertise, 
operating both domestically and 
internationally with other governments
﻿Government Functional Standard
8


## Page 12

•	
oversee the implementation of this 
functional standard, and the level 
of compliance across government
•	
monitor the performance of 
government organisations against 
the cross‑government counter fraud 
strategy (see 4.2.1)
4.7.4	 Accounting officer
The Permanent Secretary of a government 
department is usually its Principal 
Accounting Officer.
An organisation’s accounting officer is 
accountable (via a principal accounting 
officer where appropriate) to Parliament 
and the public for the stewardship of 
public resources, ensuring they are used 
effectively and to high standards of probity.
The principal accounting officer generally 
appoints the most senior executive in 
organisations under the department’s 
ambit as an accounting officer.
The accounting officer has ultimate 
responsibility for the management of 
counter fraud, bribery and corruption risk 
in their organisation, and has a duty to 
report financial irregularity arising from 
fraud, bribery and corruption.
GovS 006, Finance shall be followed.
4.7.5	 Board member accountable 
for counter fraud within 
an organisation
Organisations shall have an accountable 
individual at board level to support the 
accounting officer. The accountable board 
member should provide effective leadership 
at an organisational level to ensure the 
organisation is managing the risk of fraud, 
bribery and corruption.
An accounting officer may fulfil this role 
(for example, in smaller organisations).
The board member accountable for counter 
fraud within an organisation should:
•	
work with the organisation to meet this 
functional standard, and make the board 
aware of where there are gaps
•	
be accountable for the organisation’s 
performance in countering fraud, bribery 
and corruption
•	
ensure the board has discussions on 
the nature of the fraud, bribery and 
corruption risk facing the organisation 
and the measures being taken to 
mitigate this risk
•	
ensure the organisation has the 
resources, skills and capability to 
deliver its counter fraud, bribery and 
corruption strategy
•	
ensure the organisation has clear lines 
of accountability for fraud risk and loss 
across all levels of the organisation, 
including a senior officer accountable 
for counter fraud (see 4.7.6)
It is possible for this accountability to be 
split between different board members. 
However, where this is the case, those 
with accountability should be accountable 
for specific areas of the business (rather 
than have joint accountability), and this 
accountability should be recorded and 
recognised by the board. 
Note: Where an organisation does not have 
a formal board structure this can be replaced 
with an executive risk committee.
4.7.6	 Senior officer accountable 
for counter fraud within an 
organisation
The senior officer accountable for counter 
fraud (also known as the counter fraud 
functional lead) within an organisation 
is accountable to the board member 
accountable for counter fraud (see 
4.7.5) for the day-to-day management 
of fraud, bribery and corruption risk in 
their organisation.
9
Version 2.0 – August 2021
GovS 013: Counter Fraud


## Page 13

The components of this role may be 
assigned to more than one individual, 
provided the full scope is covered, and 
interfaces are defined and managed.
In discharging this role, they should:
•	
work with the counter fraud champion 
across the organisation to meet this 
functional standard (see also 4.7.7)
•	
support the delivery of the 
cross‑government counter fraud vision 
and strategy
•	
devise, manage and implement the 
organisation’s counter fraud, bribery and 
corruption strategy
•	
be responsible for developing capability 
within the organisation, and ensure that 
staff have the skills and capability to 
deliver the organisation’s counter fraud, 
bribery and corruption strategy, policy 
and response plan
•	
actively seek out best practice on 
counter fraud, bribery and corruption 
and integrate this into the practices 
of the organisation and their 
delivery partners
The person undertaking this role should be 
a member of the government counter fraud 
profession, and should maintain:
•	
a detailed understanding of the fraud, 
bribery and corruption risks that their 
organisation faces
•	
an effective method for 
communicating these to the board 
and the audit committee
•	
a good understanding of the 
organisation, and the context within 
which it operates, alongside the 
limitations it may have in dealing 
with fraud, bribery and corruption
•	
a good understanding of the 
organisation’s fraud, bribery and 
corruption controls, their effectiveness 
and limitations
Note: From 2022, those undertaking this role 
in government departments are required to be 
members of the counter fraud profession [4] in 
line with the UK’s anti-corruption strategy [6].
4.7.7	 Counter fraud champion within an 
organisation
Organisations should nominate an individual 
to be their counter fraud champion. The 
individual should be of sufficient seniority 
to be able to communicate and have access 
to the whole organisation.
The roles of champion and senior officer for 
counter fraud in an organisation (see 4.7.6) 
may be the same person.
The counter fraud champion should 
promote awareness of fraud, bribery and 
corruption within their organisation, and 
inform process improvements and drive 
cultural change.
4.7.8	 Employees and contractors 
within an organisation
Individual staff members have a 
responsibility to perform their roles in 
accordance with the Civil Service Code [7]. 
The code expects civil servants to operate 
with integrity and to comply with the law.
Note: Attention is drawn to the Fraud Act 
2006, Bribery Act 2010 and their equivalents 
in other jurisdictions.
In performing their role, and in meeting this 
standard, they should:
•	
undertake fraud, bribery and corruption 
training as defined and required by their 
organisation
•	
report reasonable suspicion of fraud, 
bribery and corruption using the reporting 
routes as defined by their organisation
﻿Government Functional Standard
10


## Page 14

5.	 Counter fraud, 
bribery and 
corruption practices
5.1	 Risk assessments
Organisations should have a fraud, bribery 
and corruption risk assessment.
This should be undertaken in line with the 
practice detailed in the fraud, bribery and 
corruption risk assessment professional 
standards and guidance [2].
The organisation should undertake varying 
levels of risk assessments including:
•	
a high-level fraud, bribery and corruption 
risk assessment that gives an overview 
of the main risks and challenges 
facing the organisation to the board or 
executive risk committee
•	
an intermediate fraud, bribery and 
corruption risk assessment that extends 
to departmental functions, programmes 
or major areas of spend
•	
a detailed fraud, bribery and corruption 
risk assessment that covers individual 
business units, projects or programmes
Organisations should have a high-level 
risk assessment and some detailed risk 
assessments in the highest risk areas. 
Intermediate assessments are advisable 
in larger organisations with a wide range 
of payment or service streams.
Organisations should undertake fraud, 
bribery and corruption risk assessments 
on a regular basis. They should be seen 
as an ongoing process, rather than a 
standalone exercise.
5.2	 Reporting routes
Organisations should have well established 
and documented reporting routes for staff, 
contractors and members of the public 
to report suspicions of fraud, bribery and 
corruption and a mechanism for recording 
these referrals and allegations.
Reporting routes should be published and 
promoted. Organisations should monitor the 
usage of these reporting routes, and take 
corrective action when needed.
Organisations should have a mechanism 
or system for recording reported potential 
instances of fraud, bribery and corruption. 
Instances should be recorded so the 
specifics of the allegations are clearly 
identified, including individuals and/or 
organisations involved and the act(s) they 
are alleged to have undertaken.
5.3	 Record keeping
Information (both physical and electronic) 
should be securely stored, distributed and 
be retrievable when needed to support and 
evidence the management of fraud, bribery 
and corruption cases. Information shall be 
retained in accordance with organisational 
information retention policies and legal 
requirements.
5.4	 Loss reporting
Organisations should report identified 
loss from fraud, bribery, corruption and 
error, alongside associated recoveries and 
prevented losses, to the counter fraud 
centre of expertise in line with the agreed 
government definitions [5].
Losses and recoveries should be reported 
using a consolidated data request (CDR) in 
accordance with the timescales set by the 
Cabinet Office.
11
Version 2.0 – August 2021
GovS 013: Counter Fraud


## Page 15

Loss reporting frequency may change 
depending on the need to conduct detailed 
fraud loss and error reviews. Changes to the 
frequency of reporting should be done in 
consultation with the affected organisations.
Organisations should store their data 
on fraud, bribery and corruption loss 
in a manner that is conducive to quick 
reporting and analysis.
5.5	 Access to trained 
investigators
Organisations should have access 
to appropriately qualified and trained 
investigators that meet the Government 
Counter Fraud Profession’s public 
sector fraud investigation core discipline 
standard [3].
Note: The investigation core discipline 
standard details the skills, knowledge and 
experience that those who investigate fraud 
and economic crime should have.
5.6	 Proactive detection activity
Proactive detection activity can include 
fraud, bribery and corruption measurement 
and assurance activity, or the use of data 
sharing and/or data analytics to attempt 
to find fraud in a specific business area, 
based on a good understanding of the 
risks in that area.
Organisations should undertake activity to 
try and detect fraud, bribery and corruption 
in high-risk areas where little or nothing 
is known of fraud, bribery and corruption 
levels. This activity should include using loss 
measurement activity (fraud measurement 
and assurance) where suitable.
5.7	 Awareness training
Organisations should ensure staff have 
access to and undertake fraud, bribery 
and corruption training as appropriate 
to their role.
Individual staff members should ensure 
completion of counter fraud, bribery 
and corruption training as set by the 
organisation.
The senior officer accountable for 
counter fraud within the organisation 
is responsible for the provision of fraud, 
bribery and corruption training. The senior 
officer accountable for counter fraud 
is responsible for the decision on what 
training is appropriate.
5.8	 Policies and registers 
for gifts, hospitality 
and conflicts of interest
Organisations’ governance and 
management frameworks should include 
policies and registers for gifts, hospitality 
and conflicts of interest.
Staff should declare offers of gifts and 
hospitality (whether accepted or declined) 
in accordance with the gift and hospitality 
policy that is set down by the organisation.
Offers of gifts and hospitality (whether 
accepted or declined) should be recorded 
within the gifts and hospitality register.
Staff should declare conflicts of interests 
in accordance with the conflicts of interest 
policy that is set down by the organisation.
Conflicts of interest should be recorded 
within the conflict of interest register.
﻿Government Functional Standard
12


## Page 16

A.	 References
All references are correct at the time of publication, users should check for updated versions.
I.D.
Description
1
Cabinet Office, Government Counter Fraud Profession (2018)
https://www.gov.uk/government/groups/counter-fraud-standards-and-
profession
2
Cabinet Office, Fraud Risk Assessment Core Discipline Standard (2019)
Standard is available from the Government Counter Fraud Profession 
(gcfp@cabinetoffice.gov.uk)
3
Cabinet Office, Fraud Investigation Core Discipline Standard (2018)
Standard is available from the Government Counter Fraud Profession 
(gcfp@cabinetoffice.gov.uk)
4
Cabinet Office, Fraud Leadership, Management and Strategy Core Discipline 
Standard (2018)
Standard is available from the Government Counter Fraud Profession 
(gcfp@cabinetoffice.gov.uk)
5
Cabinet Office, Fraud Loss and Error Reporting Policy (2018)
Policy guidance is available from the Counter Fraud Centre of Expertise
6
Home Office, Department for International Development and Foreign, 
Commonwealth and Development Office, UK Anti-Corruption Strategy 
2017 to 2022
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk-anti-corruption-strategy-
2017-to-2022
7
Civil Service, The Civil Service Code (2015)
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-service-code/the-civil-
service-code
8
HM Treasury, Government Finance function, Orange Book (2020)
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/orange-book
13
Version 2.0 – August 2021
GovS 013: Counter Fraud


## Page 17

B.	 Glossary
See also the common glossary of definitions https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
functional-standards-common-glossary which includes a list of defined terms and phrases 
used across the suite of government standards. The glossary includes the term, definition, 
and which function owns the term and definition.
Term
Definition
assurance
A general term for the confidence that can be derived from objective 
information over the successful conduct of activities, the efficient and 
effective design and operation of internal control, compliance with 
internal and external requirements, and the production of insightful 
and credible information to support decision making. Confidence 
diminishes when there are uncertainties around the integrity of 
information or of underlying processes.
bribery
The offering, promising or giving of a financial or other advantage to 
induce or reward improper performance and/or the request, or receipt 
of such an advantage. It includes the corporate offence of failing to 
prevent bribery (as set out in the Bribery Act 2010).
corruption
The abuse of a public or private office for personal gain. The active or 
passive misuse of the powers of public officials, appointed or elected, 
for private financial or other benefits (as set out in the OECD glossary 
of international standards in criminal law).
counter fraud 
strategy
A defined approach for how the organisation will counter fraud, bribery 
and corruption over a two to five year period.
counter fraud 
annual action plan
A plan detailing the specific actions that an organisation will undertake 
to deliver the counter fraud, bribery and corruption strategy or specific 
parts of it within the financial year.
defined 
(way of working)
In the context of standards, ‘defined’ denotes a documented way 
of working which people are expected to use. This can apply to any 
aspect of a governance or management framework for example 
processes, codes of practice, methods, templates, tools and guides.
established 
(way of working)
In the context of standards, ‘established’ denotes a way of working 
that is implemented and used throughout the organisation. This can 
apply to any aspect of a governance or management framework for 
example processes, codes of practice, methods, templates, tools 
and guides.
fraud
A false representation, or failure to disclose that is dishonest, or the 
abuse of position with the intention to cause financial gain or loss 
(as set out in the Fraud Act 2006).
﻿Government Functional Standard
14


## Page 18

Term
Definition
fraud loss 
measurement
The method of selecting a sample to estimate the total cost of fraud 
or error.
fraud 
outcome‑based 
metrics
A method of measuring a particular task, activity or process using 
quantifiable measures based upon the outcome (i.e. financial savings, 
fraud rate, volume/ value of fraud detected/ prevented, false positive 
rate or percentage of staff trained).
fraud, bribery 
and corruption 
reporting route
A communication channel or reporting medium for staff, contractors 
or members of the public to report fraud, bribery and corruption to the 
organisation (i.e. a whistleblowing line, fraud reporting hotline or online 
reporting service/tool).
governance
Governance defines relationships and the distribution of rights 
and responsibilities among those who work with and in the 
organisation. It determines the rules and procedures through which 
the organisational objectives are set, and provides the means of 
attaining those objectives and monitoring performance. Importantly, 
it defines where accountability lies throughout the organisation.
governance and 
management 
framework
A governance and management framework sets out the authority 
limits, decision making roles and rules, degrees of autonomy, 
assurance needs, reporting structure, accountabilities and roles 
and the appropriate management practices and associated 
documentation needed to meet this standard.
lessons learnt
The practice of continuous improvement based upon organisational 
learning in a risk management context.
loss reporting 
(counter fraud)
The method of reporting loss data relating to fraud and error to the 
cabinet office using the consolidated data request process.
organisation
An organisation, in the context of government functional standards, 
is the generic term used to describe a government department, arm’s 
length body, or any other entity that is identified as being within scope 
of a functional standard.
plan
A plan sets out how objectives, outcomes and outputs are to be 
delivered within defined constraints, in accordance with the strategy.
strategy
A strategy outlines longer term objectives, outcomes and outputs, 
and the means to achieve them, to inform future decision and planning.
15
Version 2.0 – August 2021
GovS 013: Counter Fraud


## Page 19

C.	 Counter fraud organisational basics checklist
1.	 Have an accountable individual at board level who is responsible for counter fraud, 
bribery and corruption.
2.	 Have a counter fraud, bribery and corruption strategy that is submitted to the centre.
3.	 Have a fraud, bribery and corruption risk assessment that is submitted to the centre.
4.	 Have a policy and response plan for dealing with potential instances of fraud, bribery 
and corruption.
5.	 Have an annual action plan that summarises key actions to improve capability, activity 
and resilience in that year.
6.	 Have outcome-based metrics summarising what outcomes they are seeking to achieve 
that year. For organisations with ‘significant investment’ in counter fraud, bribery and 
corruption or ‘significant estimated’ fraud loss, include metrics with a financial impact.
7.	  Have well established and documented reporting routes for staff, contractors and 
members of the public to report suspicions of fraud, bribery and corruption and a 
mechanism for recording these referrals and allegations.
8.	 Report identified loss from fraud, bribery, corruption and error, and associated 
recoveries, to the centre in line with the agreed government definitions.
9.	 Have agreed access to trained investigators that meet the agreed public sector 
skill standard.
10.	Undertake activity to try and detect fraud in high-risk areas where little or nothing 
is known of fraud, bribery and corruption levels, including loss measurement activity 
where suitable.
11.	Ensure all staff have access to and undertake fraud awareness, bribery and corruption 
training as appropriate to their role.
12.	Have policies and registers for gifts, hospitality and conflicts of interest.
﻿Government Functional Standard
16

